## Creative Domain Analysis

### Programming

Throughout my childhood, I played outside; climbing trees, designing custom racetracks for our toy cars in the dirt, and exploring the edges of my observable universe became a daily routine. On the contrary, I was also fascinated by technology. As much as I enjoyed outsides, technology was inherently different; it was more complex, more rewarding, and more mysterious. Around this time, consumer electronics were becoming ubiquitous, and I was using every chance I could find to use those machines. Computers were performing tasks that seemed physically impossible. Why this keypress opens that window? Why upon following a sequence of actions the program always crashes?

I started learning about programming in my freshman year. At that point, I had to declare my major soon, and I was familiarizing myself with as many domains as possible. One aspect of computer programming that stood out from others was that it was all about communicating with a machine and instructing it to do whatever I wanted it to do. I was particularly mesmerized by the fact that my inputs can change the output of my program drastically, but the definition of my program stayed unchanged. Thinking about the edge cases of a problem became a daily habit. The challenge was simple: don’t only think about a specific dataset but focus on every possibility. I realized, as Papert puts it, that I could *be* the numbers flowing through my program.

As I further learned about algorithms, data structures, and concepts like efficiency and resource management, programming became much more than just guarding my programs for unexpected outcomes. At this point, the correct result from a program was not the goal, rather the goal became all about the process itself. Optimizations and the correct representation of the data became prevalent. My childhood curiosity about technology turned into long problem-solving sessions. This sense of learning and discovery helped channel my psychic energy into long, productive flow states. Csikszentmihalyi exemplifies an ideal zone for challenge and skillset relationship in “The Conditions of Flow”. Just like the aspiring tennis player Alex, over the years, as my skills in programming advanced, I started attacking more complex problems. Among all, graphics programming stood up as the most influential challenge I chose.

Up to this point in my life, all the programs I have written consisted of console applications and some programs with GUI. The challenge was to draw something on the computer display using pixels. Since graphics programming is considerably different than traditional concepts, I spent a substantial amount of time understanding graphics concepts in “OpenGL SuperBible: Comprehensive Tutorial and Reference”, and I could finally draw a rotating cube. After this point, the correct output of a program under unexpected inputs, or the tedious optimizations of data structures stopped being the goal of my programming journey; they simply turned into sources of affordances and constraints for expression, and programming itself became the medium. 

Programming is a dense medium that sustains continued exploration in both technical and artistic standpoints. It contains various programming languages, frameworks, systems, and domains. I am growing more proficient in analyzing these differences, affordances of each component, and limits of each system. Granular synthesis in C++ with rtAudio, for example, has different affordances than raymarching in GLSL with OpenGL. The former contains more resolution (more samples per second) and risk (literal risk of damaging auditory system) than the latter. Whether it’s a creativity support tool, generative art, or electronic music, choosing the right tools that best suit the needs of my creative projects became an increasingly important aspect of my practice. As McCullough argues, “[t]he challenge in designing abstract systems of expressive capability is not a limitation of the systems themselves of dealing with abstract structure. Rather, the challenge is to develop abstract descriptions of sufficient richness, capable of capturing profound emotions and subtle expressive nuances.”
