# Reading Reflection: February 27th

<!--
LilyPad in the Wild: How Hardwareʼs Long Tail is Supporting New Engineering and Design Communities

Based on our discussion of creative practice, describe, from your perspective, the benefits in-the-wild evaluation offers as a way to understand the opportunities and limits of a creative tool or technology? What are the limitations or challenges? Why do you think in-the-wild evaluation is rare in HCI research overall?
-->


*LilyPad in the Wild: How Hardwareʼs Long Tail is Supporting New Engineering and Design Communities* (2010) evaluates the distribution, adoption, and evolution of LilyPad, an open-source toolkit that broadened participation in creative microcontroller community. Its open-source hardware design and creative commons license enable the public to tinker with the product. This interaction creates an ecosystem where community members make incredible projects, teach the potential of the device to others, and improve upon the current technology. It builds "New Clubhouses" for people, especially women, who were previously distant to the creative computing field. 

I encountered in-the-wild evaluation for the first time in my readings, and I found it incredibly beneficial in understanding what the technology actually is. Authors "would like to determine if the LilyPad is sparking a new community or if it is simply providing a useful tool to an existing one (p. 204)". This distinction is hard to justify without an extended time frame and in-depth analysis. It showcases the opportunities for improvement and reveals the limitations through user experiences.

Although authors achieved an amazing job with data collection, analysis, and presentation of their results, it looks like in-the-wild evaluation as a method could be a delicate subject. Aspects like low sample space, ambiguous descriptions in the dataset and qualitative nature of reflections require careful analysis and presentation of formative reasoning.

In the article, the authors mention that they were surprised to see "very little scholarship has examined this new open and collaborative physical/digital movement (p.199)". In-the-wild evaluation in the HCI community could be rare because of the fact that it is relatively harder to track the evolution of technology for an extended amount of time once it is deployed.